# October 8th, 2025
## Agenda
[P3666 R0 Bit-precise integer ](https://github.com/cplusplus/papers/issues/2420)

[P3540 R2 #embed Parameter offset ](https://github.com/cplusplus/papers/issues/2177)

[P3731 R0 #embed Preprocessor Parameter Order ](https://github.com/cplusplus/papers/issues/2360)

## Attendees

- Jens Gustedt 
- Aaron Ballman 
- Nevin Liber 
- David Svoboda
- Corentin Jabot
- Matthias Kretz
- Vlad Serebrennikov
- Robert Seacord
- Joshua Cranmer 
- Nina Dinka Ranns
- Jan Schultke
- Peter Bindels 
- JeanHeyd Meneide
- Brian Bi 
- Rajan Bhakta

## Minutes

** p3666R1
/Kretz/: Can this optimize erroneous integers?

/Schultke/: I don't think that is possible. This paper is also tagged for SG6; we can discuss it there.

/Meneide/: I agree with your position. C++ already has {} to initialize values; it already bans narrowing conversions.

/Kretz/: Most contentions part is happening.  We should take BitInt<> from C and avoid compatibility issues.  For different behavior, we should use a different type.  This breaks nothing with C.  You can implement const-eval constructor that looks at the value and throws or aborts.

/Svoboda/: Can't we just specify a minimum BITINT_MAXWIDTH value in the standard, like 65,536?  That seems to be WG14 practice.

/Meneide/: Is there a non-std:: prefix version of the keyword WG21 might invest in?   If they don't want _BitInt solution, they should use their own keyword.

/Seacord/: Did WG14 have a friendly spelling for this?  /No/  So we've passed the baton to WG14 for a friendly spelling. I agree with the author's positions.

/Serebrennkiov/:  If EWG rejects _BitInt but still provides bit integers, I don't see BitInt being a keyword. Having a BitInt type work with signed and unsigned will be a nightmare to support.

/Jabot/: I second everything /Serebrennkiov/ said.

/Ballman/: No problems with adding alias template to C++. IIRC WG14 did not want a friendly name b/c we did not h want a header file; we did not have <stdbit.h>. We were also uncertain what spelling WG21 would want. A <stdbit.h> header file would work well.  I'm not opposed to an enumeration, but WG14 hasn't seen it yet.  We could add that as a followup to WG21 once WG14 has resolved underlying types.

/Kretz/: I would not have the type in the standard namespace. Need separate discussion of what the type name should be.

/Seacord/: I agree with /Kretz/ with not putting templates in initial proposal.  The paper allowing for BitInt<1> is likely to pass.  We just need a little continued coordination to make sure C & C++ directions remain synced.

/Meneide/: I agree with /Kretz/.  I don't think you need to get rid of the alias conflicts.  If you want to box some of these behaviors, you should have a library of class templates to customize this behavior.  This lets you get around issues like having your own types.

/Ranns/: We only need to comment on the 2nd & last point.

/Poll/: 
Do you agree with the author’s position on fundamental types being better than class template for _BitInt>?  
Any objections to unanimous consent?  /None/

/Poll/: 
Do you agree with allowing 0wb = _BitInt(1) and enum E : _BitInt(N), assuming C adopts N3699 and N3705?  
Any objections to unanimous consent?  /None/

/Poll/: 
Do you agree with keeping UB on signed integer overflow for _BitInt? 
Any objections to unanimous consent?  /None/

/Poll/: 
Do you agree that WG21 keep all implicit conversions for _BitInt?  
Any objections to unanimous consent?  /None/

/Poll/: 
Do you agree that WG21 keep the lower limit on the value of BITINT_MAXWIDTH from C?  
Any objections to unanimous consent?  /None/

/Poll/: 
Do you agree that WG21 should add a _BitInt keyword?  
Any objections to unanimous consent?  /None/

/Ranns/: How about this poll: Encourage the author to pursue the alias template idea and bring back a proposal

/Jabot/: Is there a compatibility issue, if we don't know the answer to that question, we need to see a paper.

/Meneide/: It might be premature to ask this question. EWG or LWG should decide what they want, and bring it to the compatibility group or WG14.

/Ranns/: OK, let's not have this poll.

Group agrees that we want to pursue compatibility between C and C++ with regards to _BitInt


** p3540

/Serebrennikov/: Last time Core studied this there were issues with offset and double_offset.

/Meneide/: C requires preprocessor attributes permit __ID__ around identifier to prevent macro expansion from clobbering attribute names. C++ does not have this; they solve the problem in the Core issue by forbidding preprocessor defines that override names like this.

/Ranns/: Do people understand this paper enough for a recommendation?  If you do not understand this paper, please do not vote.  

/Poll/: Should we ship paper p3540? 

SF-F-N-A-SA: 5-5-0-0-0

** p3731
/Ranns/: We will discuss this at the next meeting.
