# January 30th, 2025
## Agenda

- [P2746 Deprecate and Replace Fenv Rounding Modes (Hans Boehm)](https://github.com/cplusplus/papers/issues/1437)
- [P3248 Require [u]intptr_t (Gonzalo Brito Gadeschi)](https://github.com/cplusplus/papers/issues/1909)
- [P2142 Allow '.' operator to work on pointers (Jim Buckeyne)](https://github.com/cplusplus/papers/issues/868)

## Attendees
NR      Nina Ranns (chair)

DH      Davis Herring (co-chair, scribe)

HB      Hans Boehm

JG      Jens Gustedt

JC      Joshua Cranmer

CJ      Corentin Jabot

AB      Aaron Ballman

JB      Jim Buckeyne

RB      Rajan Bhakta

KE      Khalil Estell

GB      Gonzalo Brito

VV      Ville Voutilainen

SV      Steven Vormwald

LV      Lauri Vasama

LY      Li Yihe

AM      Alisdair Meredith

PM      Paul McKenney

JM      Jens Maurer

PP      Paul Preney

JS      Jan Schultke

NL      Nevin Liber

## Meeting Summary


### P2746 Deprecate and Replace Fenv Rounding Modes


(HB presents slides for P2746.)

HB: Most people don't know `#pragma STDC FENV_ACCESS` is even a feature, and it's not been well supported in C++.

HB: SG6 tried to find use cases and found 3, none of which seems compelling:

HB: Interval arithmetic might be better implemented in assembly anyway.

HB: WG14 mentioned using rounding modes for fuzz testing, but it's heuristic at best.

HB: `rint` having the rounding mode as an implicit argument is a misfeature.

HB: IEEE is moving in the direction of static rounding modes, but that may not be enough.

HB: I don't agree with IEEE/WG14 that rounding modes should be bound to a scope or time interval at all, since computing an upper bound is not the same as rounding every subexpression upward.

JG: (about a slide) There was no C20; before C23 is C17.

HB: A member function tells whether results are correctly rounded.

DH: The ODR might not account for different rounding in different TUs.

HB: Guy Davidson wants reproducible operators, which could be a wrapper for the correctly-rounded non-operator operations.

HB: I consider `#pragma STDC FENV_ROUND`'s block-based nature a disadvantage.

RB: We did consider `constexpr` interactions in C in adding `FENV_ROUND`.

HB: It seems that language divergence here has been deemed acceptable.

RB: Changing constexpr rounding would happen only on new C23 request.

HB: We can look at the library proposal, but that's probably less interesting here.

NR: I'd like to hear what WG14 thinks will happen if C++ deprecates these functions.

JG: I'm not opposed to removing the dynamic environment support.  I don't like encapsulating the rounding mode into a type, since we don't want many such types in C and selecting among them requires expertise.

HB: Maybe I should show the proposed interface.

(HB presents P2746 itself.)

HB: This proposal is C++-centric: it doesn't introduce new floating-point types that have a rounding mode, just introduce a class type that holds one and uses it for each operation.  The syntactic convenience works well in C++, but is not C-friendly.

HB: (in response to a scribing clarification) Davis was actually the one who suggested this interface.

JC: I'm working on floating-point semantics in C++; the dynamic environment in general is a problem for both languages.  The interaction with compile-time features for rounding like template parameters is complicated.

HB: Matthias has brought this up repeatedly, but it's very hard to specify what implementations actually do here.  Floating-point exceptions are an interesting problem, but SG6 decided to defer them.  Flush-to-zero is hard to specify.

JM: Why do we believe the static `#pragma` is bad (other than syntactically)?  It seems implementable.

JC: Inline functions would want to inherit the `#pragma` but can't (you can't have it as a template argument).

JS: Even in C you could call a real function.

JC: Which is the common case in C++.

RB: User-defined functions don't use the ambient static rounding mode.

HB: The C23 rules do affect the standard functions.

RB: Because they are the IEEE functions.

HB: I prefer the per-operation specification because except in special cases you need to consider each operation separately.

JS: Is there an example where you want it per-operation, not per type?

HB: Use cases are rare, but you can't implement interval arithmetic with a fixed rounding mode.

NR: Going back to WG14/WG21 compatibility, do I understand correctly that we already have an incompatibility with C23 that we can't remove?

RB: C++ doesn't specify it, but it could.

DH: Would the effects on the standard library functions of the C23 feature be implementable/desirable in C++?

RB: I think it's desirable, given the IEEE correspondence.

JG: How widely implemented are the C pragmas?

RB: C99 pragmas are often accepted and ignored.

JC: Clang implements them; NVCC doesn't support `FENV_ACCESS`, but a similar per-function feature; GCC has only command-line flags.

RB: They all do have flags.

JC: C23 pragmas are partially implemented in Clang, without the library-function support.

HB: So constant evaluation follows the rounding mode.

JC: Yes.

NR: I don't think we can do any polls here; this needs to be seen by SG6 again at least.

HB: This has been approved by SG6, but I'd like them to see it again.

NR: Davis, are you considering writing a WG21 paper on the C23 feature?

DH: No; I was trying to understand how durable the existing incompatibility is.


### P3248 Require [u]intptr_t

(GB presents slides for P3248R2.)

GB: I'm asking WG14 whether there is some other impact we didn't consider.

DH: It's true that "pointer value" and "address" are different, but `uintptr_t` still can't hold a pointer value; it might be a third thing, but the platforms with such a third thing (like CHERI) aren't conforming anyway, so it might not matter.

GB: The intent is just that it have C's semantics.

JG: I proposed this for C23, but it wasn't adopted.  I see in `<cstdint>` that C++ isn't based on C23 which bases everything on widths.

NR: That's in progress.

JM: There's a paper, but I don't know whether it addresses that particular point.  This paper is like how C++ adopted 2's complement (even though C followed that decision later).

JS: Aren't there `printf` macros too?

GB: I think so; I'll double-check whether those are included automatically.

NR: I hear (absent objection) that we don't have major concerns here, and that WG14 can pick this up later.

### P2142 Allow '.' operator to work on pointers

(JB presents P2142R1.)

JB: My paper based on C++17.

JB: Beginning programmers at my most recent company still had trouble recognizing the need for `->`.

VV: We can't make this change for smart pointers.

JB: It's not an error to use `.` with them.

VV: But it's not the same as `->` there, and we don't want to mix their meanings.  Who would actually be helped when avoiding raw pointers?  The improvement is too late.

JM: It's a fundamental difference (Java notwithstanding) and a non-starter.  Maybe WG14 wants the idea, but why discuss this in SG22?

PM: The Linux kernel developers actively don't want this; `->` heralds a potential cache miss and allowing `.` hides errors.  The requirements for C are not the same as high(er)-level language. 
We'd have to wait years to use it anyway.  The beginning-programmer mindset described is incompatible with producing quality kernel code.

JB: I had an algorithm in C and could change it into Javascript just by replacing `->` with `.` and `int` with `var`.  It would be nice to go backwards.

PM: The forward direction is a trivial change.

JB: Yes, a pointer can have an additional expense.

JB: I'll drop the paper; WG14 was interested if WG21 was.

NR: We have people from WG14...

JG: We would never add something without existing compiler support, and their customers haven't demanded this.  The beginner problem is not the syntax, but the abstract notion of a pointer.

NR: This probably can't proceed in WG21, but are there more comments from WG14?

PP: `->` is used in C++ for many things beyond pointer indirection.

JS: If we could have `operator.`, this might make sense.

VV: It's attractive, but we'd need a time machine (or a third syntax that wouldn't match Java/Javscript).  We also can break programs by making existing syntax no longer ill-formed.

AB: I agree with Ville, but to extend what Paul McKenney said: we could downgrade the error to a warning, but users appreciate the feedback.

NR: We don't approve papers, but EWG (which does) is unlikely to approve this.

JB: In C, a generic operator allows more generic usage.

AB: WG14 tends to be very conservative with field experience (as Jens Gustedt said).  I don't know what the Clang community with an RFC on this subject, but there would probably be pushback even just for C (partly because of things like Objective C).

VV: Most users wouldn't dare to request language extensions, and compiler authors aren't keen on extensions in fundamental areas, so it would be hard to get implementation experience here.  There's a chicken-and-egg problem between the committees and the compiler implementers.  We don't have good information about what users want (but perhaps it's a good thing that compilers don't implement just any idea).

JB: Open Watcom supports DOS with weird pointer sizes.  The patch would be minor.

NR: We're running out of time.  Jim, do you have any questions?

JB: No; thanks for the conversation.

JS: Is SG22 meeting in Hagenberg?

NR: We don't meet in person because we wouldn't have WG14.

NR: I'll schedule another teleconference once we have papers identified.
