# January 7th, 2025
## Agenda
- [P3477R0 There are exactly 8 bits in a byte (JF Bastien)](https://github.com/cplusplus/papers/issues/2131)
- [P3475R0 Defang and deprecate memory_order::consume  (Hans Boehm)](https://github.com/cplusplus/papers/issues/2129)
- [P3384R0 COUNTER (Jeremy Rifkin)](https://github.com/cplusplus/papers/issues/2041)

## Attendees
- Nina Dinka Ranns - Chair
- Joshua Cranmer 
- Jens Gustedt - Scribe
- Rajan Bhakta (IBM)
- Jeremy Rifkin
- Hans Boehm
- Paul E. McKenney
- Ville Voutilainen 
- Jens Maurer
- Robert Seacord

## Meeting Summary

P3475R0 Defang and deprecate memory_order::consume 

Hans Boehm presents.
--------------------

defang ~ make it less dangerous
consume was introduced C++11/C11 but was never really implemented
The reason was to make it easier to write lock-free code, e.g RCU idiom. But technically the consume model was never necessary because architectures do the update of dependent data.
In the field the model was never completely implemented.
It was already proposed to be deprecated in C++17, but then the attempt failed. But since not much has happened on the implementation side, Hans reproposes again.
On the other hand the memory model needs reform and consume complicates the arguments.
Even on ARM processors the difference is not relevant any more.
The paper simplifies the C++ text quite noticeably.
Existing code should be preserved.

Rajan: I talked to our teams and IBM is good with it.

Jens G.: all for it for the C memory model

Paul: linux kernel has something similar to kill_dependency but do not use the C feature

Proposal to push it also to WG14

Consensus to proceed.

P3477R0 There are exactly 8 bits in a byte
--------------------
Robert Seacord presents.

No one has answered this in interview questions correctly.
There is some hardware that has more than 8 bits in a byte.
There is a clear argument to restrict this value for C++, but for C the argument is a less weaker because there are more compilers around

Ville: there are DSP by TI with 24 bit processors, but there is no plan to do more than C++03 on that platform. He has no idea if their C compiler is modernized to be relevant.

Jens M.: possible avenue would be that C++ goes ahead

Joshua: some people come from time to time to propose more than 8 bits in clang

Jeremy: would it still be possible to have C++ compilers with more bits? 

Ville: probably … you would have to emulate that

Jens G.: recently we had problems in C for the bit-op functions, so doing something similar would really help

Jens M.: gcc still has the flag, so you could implement it relatively easily, but that is really unlikely that someone would really do that for C++, in the past 10 year nobody cared

Ville: DSP do parallel processing and you wouldn't do text processing, it is really special hardware

Jens G.: in C, resticting to 8 bit for hosted environments would probably the most convenient to do, freestanding could have a bit more possibilities

Consensus to proceed

p3384 __COUNTER__
--------------------
Jeremy Rifkin presents:


It is used quite a lot of places, mostly for unique identifiers.
There are alternatives in C++ with templates, but not in C.
Not propagated across module boundaries.
Question is about how often this would evaluate? In C++ all compilers agree, in C there is some deviation.
Counter range? The type would jump at boundaries of the signed types.

Jens G: - decimal literals should be defined different - use perhaps INT_MAX as a minimal guarantee

Jens M.: when it overflows the maximal value, the program is illformed, so compilation is usually aborted

Robert: has questions about using unsigned

Ville: there will be antibodies activated in the C++ community, so maybe it is better if this goes into C first

Jens G.: would they prefer to have in C first, so they don't have to worry about it?

Jens M.: It is already there in the field for C++. But we would need to have the specification to match reality.

Ville: Suggests to primarily go through WG14.

Consensus to proceed.

