# April 24th, 2026
## Agenda
[P0085 R3 Oo... adding a coherent character sequence to begin octal-literals](https://github.com/cplusplus/papers/issues/2055)

[P3658 R1 Adjust identifier following new Unicode recommendations](https://github.com/cplusplus/papers/issues/2288)

## Attendees

* Jan Schultke (chair)
* Jens Maurer (minutes)
* Nina Dinka Ranns
* Tom Honermann
* Jens Gustedt (until 18:30 UTC)
* Jolly Chen
* Stuart Davis Herring
* Jan Schultke
* Nevin Liber
* Aaron Ballman
* Alex Celeste
* Axel Naumann
* Corentin Jabot
* Giuseppe d'Angelo
* JeanHeyd Meneide
* Joshua Cranmer
* Li Yihe
* Maryam Karampour
* Matthias Wippich
* Rajan Bhakta
* Robin Leroy

## P0085R3 Oo... adding a coherent character sequence to begin octal-literals

* Jolly presenting P0085R3.
* The new prefix has already been accepted for C2y. See C2y 6.4.5.2.
* Jan: Concern about C++ library version of strtol not being able to parse this in C++29, until the next sync with C.
* Axel: EWG told us to make a separate paper for the standard library.
* Giuseppe: Is there already such a paper, e.g. for iostreams "oct"?
* Jolly: No.
* Tom: Multiple-digit octals that are all-0 are not obsolescent in C, but in C++, they are.
* Jolly: Authors of the C proposal clarified the intent was to deprecate "00" and "000" etc, but the wording for C doesn't say that. Current C++ proposal does deprecate "00" and "000". (Neither language deprecates "0".)
* Aaron: Mild preference to adjust C.

**POLL**: P0085R3: We recommend against inclusion in C++29
unless the corresponding C++ standard library changes
to support `0o` (e.g. `strtol`) are made.

| SF |  F |  N |  A | SA |
| -- | -- | -- | -- | -- |
|  0 |  0 |  3 | 10 |  3 |

**Outcome**: Consensus against
**Attendance**: 20

**POLL**: P0085R3: We recommend deprecating multi-digit `00..`
literals in C as well.

| SF |  F |  N |  A | SA |
| -- | -- | -- | -- | -- |
|  3 |  8 |  3 |  2 |  0 |

**Outcome**: Consensus in favor
**Attendance**: 20

- Rajan: POSIX headers use "000" for file permission.
- Tom: System headers don't produce warnings.

## P3658R1 Adjust identifier following new Unicode recommendations

* Tom: Presenting P3658R1.  Unicode has updated their recommendations to include certain math symbols in valid identifiers.
* WG14 has normative references to ISO 10646, UAX#44, and Derived Core Properties (all undated).
* Corentin: This is implemented in clang, with no further complaints.
* Robin: WG14 might want to consider this as a Defect Report.

**POLL**: P3658R1: We recommend for WG14 to make
the same changes to identifiers in C as proposed in P3658R1.

WG14 Delegation:

| SF |  F |  N |  A | SA |
| -- | -- | -- | -- | -- |
|  7 |  1 |  1 |  0 |  0 |

**Outcome**: Consensus in favor

WG21:

| SF |  F |  N |  A | SA |
| -- | -- | -- | -- | -- |
|  9 |  3 |  0 |  0 |  0 |

**Outcome**: Consensus in favor

## Closing remarks

* Jan: Still 5 papers in the backlog.
* Tom, Aaron volunteering to review Robin's WG14 paper for identifiers.
